# Conclusion {#sec:conclusion}
\marginpar{Felix Betke}
Our goal is to create an emulator that allows users to experiment with simplified versions of select Meltdown and Spectre type attacks without access to vulnerable hardware. The choice of Python as the programming language and a limited number of UI libraries ensure our emulator can be used on anything that runs Python, regardless of operating system or architecture. We document our implementation and provide a user manual. Our evaluation (see [chapter @sec:evaluation]) shows that the presented emulator can run simple programs while using the concepts of out-of-order and speculative execution. Further, Meltdown-US-L1 and Spectre v1 attacks are possible given the default configuration and additional example programs. The configuration file allows users to enable mitigations and experiment with their own microprograms that are run after each rollback.

## Limitations
While our initial goals are reached, some limitations of our emulator exist. Firstly, due to not running an operating system, we lack virtual addresses and paging, therefore not fully modelling the Meltdown-US-L1 attack and how exceptions can be forced by user space processes. Secondly, our current implementation of read operations behaves differently than Intel's CPUs are believed to behave. In our version, if needed data is not present in the cache, instructions stall until the data is available, rather than computing on values taken from other microarchitectural buffers [@ridl]. As a result, our version of Meltdown-US-L1 is still possible, but in the event the data to be stolen is not cached, users will observe a potentially unexpected stall, not a read from other buffers (see [@sec:config-cache]). Since Meltdown-US-L1 does not strictly rely on any of those microarchitectural buffers, we do not model them. Still, this difference is clearly communicated to users by our modified version of Meltdown-US-L1 and we are confident our simplified emulator allows users to better understand the chosen attacks.

## Future Work
One of the obvious improvements would be to make the emulator vulnerable to other Meltdown and Spectre variants. For Meltdown, this would require the addition of new microarchitectural buffers, such as the load, store, or line-fill buffers (see [@sec:background-cpu]). For Spectre, a more elaborate BPU (see [@sec:background-out-of-order-execution] and [@sec:background-speculative-execution]) is needed. Other improvements could be to enable users to run multiple programs (attacker and victim), either by context switching or Hyper-Threading, or create an operating system to support virtual addressing. Lastly, one could add further improvements to the UI in regards to visualization and functionality (conditional breakpoints, for example).
